docs(architecture): improve flow and add operator-friendly intro to architecture overview (#3140)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/block-node/architecture/architecture-overview.md

# Architecture Overview

This document describes the internal architecture of the Block Node — how it is structured
internally, which modules it is composed of, and how data flows through the plugin system.
It is useful for operators who want to understand what happens inside the node, and for
contributors developing or customising plugins.

For a higher-level view of how Block Nodes fit in the Hiero network — how they receive block
streams from Consensus Nodes and serve them to Mirror Nodes — see the
[Block Node Overview](../block-node-overview.md).

> ---

Reviewer: Left over or intentional?

streams from Consensus Nodes and serve them to Mirror Nodes — see the
[Block Node Overview](../block-node-overview.md).

---

The Block Node is primarily designed to process gRPC streams of Block Items and distribute
them efficiently across system components and to clients using a plugin-based architecture
for additional service processing.

## How The Block Node Works

1. **Startup:** `BlockNodeApp` loads configuration, loads plugins, registers API services and starts the web server.
2. **Event Distribution:** Distribute events from APIs and internal notifications.
   - Incoming gRPC block streams from a publisher are received and passed to the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
   - Block items are distributed via a block items ring buffer to registered plugins.
   - Plugins may publish notification events to the `BlockMessagingFacility`.
   - Notifications are distributed via a notification ring buffer to registered plugins.
3. **Plugin Processing:** Each registered plugin processes block items and notifications independently, enabling
   dynamic, asynchronous, and extensible workflows.

## System Architecture Diagram

> The overall architecture of BlockNode is illustrated below:

Reviewer 2: We should probably keep the document consistent with `Block Node` rather than `BlockNode`. This is repeated a few other places in this document.

```suggestion
The overall architecture of the Block Node is illustrated below:
```

> ![block-node-app-logic](./../../assets/block-node-app-logic.svg)

Reviewer 2: This image needs to be updated, not for this PR, but probably as a follow-up.

Author: @jsync-swirlds, Happy to create a follow-up PR for this. Could you clarify what the updated diagram should show - should it be the Plugin Lifecycle state machine, the Startup Sequence, or an updated version of the current app logic flowchart? The spec in docs/design/architecture/new-plugin-architecture.md has all three - just want to make sure we render the right one.

Reviewer 2: It should be an updated version of this diagram.
The structure is not wrong; it is just out of date with some obsolete plugin names and missing several newer plugins.

Author: @jsync-swirlds, 

Based on a codebase audit, the changes I think the diagram needs are:

**Remove**: S3ArchivePlugin (deprecated; replaced by cloud-storage-archive and cloud-storage-expanded)
**Rename**: VerificationServicePlugin → BlockVerificationServicePlugin
**Add**: RsaRosterBootstrapPlugin (roster-bootstrap-rsa), RosterBootstrapTssPlugin (roster-bootstrap-tss), CloudStorageArchivePlugin (cloud-storage-archive), ExpandedCloudStoragePlugin (cloud-storage-expanded)

Do you have the original Mermaid source for this diagram, or is there anything else we're missing? Once confirmed, we'll regenerate and open a follow-up PR.

Reviewer 2: I do not know the original source for this diagram.
The changes given appear correct.

Reviewer: Fortunately i had my initial attempt stashed something.
@deshmukhpranali you can use this in follow up
```
config:
  theme: redux
  layout: elk
---
flowchart TD
 subgraph subGraph0["BlockStream Publisher"]
        Q["gRPC Client"]
  end
 subgraph subGraph1["gRPC Subscriber"]
        R["gRPC Client"]
  end
 subgraph subGraph2["Block Requestor"]
        S["gRPC Client"]
  end
 subgraph subGraph3["NodeStatus Requestor"]
        T["gRPC Client"]
  end
 subgraph X["BlockNode Core Modules"]
        B["SPI"]
        C["BlockProviders"]
        E["Messaging"]
        F["Health"]
  end
 subgraph Y["BlockNode Add-On Modules"]
        G["BlockAccess"]
        H["S3-Archive"]
        I["ServerStatus"]
        J["StreamPublisher"]
        K["StreamSubscriber"]
        L["Verification"]
  end
 subgraph subGraph4["BlockNode Server"]
        A["BlockNodeApp"]
        X
        Y
  end
    A --> X & Y
    Q <--> J
    K --> R
    G --> S
    T <--> I
```

- **BlockVerificationServicePlugin:** Verifies incoming blocks for integrity prior to persistence.

For additional details on plugins, refer to the [Plugins](./plugins.md).

## Modules

The repo structure is organized into multiple Java modules, each encapsulating specific functionality.
Plugin modules are loaded dynamically at runtime using the JPMS service loader mechanism.

### Main Modules

The following modules under `block-node` directory form the core of the Block Node system.
- `app`: Main application logic and entrypoint (`BlockNodeApp.java`).
- `spi`: Service Provider Interfaces for well known plugins and facilities.
- `messaging`: Core messaging facilities for distributing block items.
- `health`: Kubernetes Health check plugin.

### Additional Modules

The following modules provide additional functionality and are loaded as plugins if present:
- `block-access`: Plugin for accessing block data.
- `block-providers`: Plugin for various block storage backends.
- `server-status`: Plugin for Server status API.
- `stream-publisher`: Plugin for a Stream publishing API.
- `stream-subscriber`: Plugin for Stream subscribing API.

> - `block-verification`: Plugin for Block verification.

Reviewer: `cloud-storage-archive` and `cloud-storage-expanded` are missing. They replaced the S3ArchivePlugin.
Also add roster-bootstrap-tss and roster-bootstrap-rsa
